# Event-History-Models-for-Student-Persistence
Event history models are some of the most helpful inferential approaches for studying education phenomena that happen over time, especially persistence and graduation. For this project, a fellow graduate student and I went through an IRB process to get data from a community college to study why students stop out.

We tracked the study college's Fall 2009 first-time undergraduate cohort through Fall 2016. To set up our data, we created a balanced panel in which each cohort student had 22 semester events, regardless of whether or not he or she was actually enrolled for each of those terms. Variables included both time-invariant factors like gender and race/ethnicity as well as time-variant ones likes cumulative GPA and financial aid awards. The seven Stata .do files prefixed with "DATA" represent all of the code required to set up this balanced panel.

For our models, contained in the MODELS.do file, we chose to perform Cox regression with time-varying coefficients and competing risks (i.e. the likelihood that a student stopped out at any given point in time was modeled as the result of both the included variables and whether or not a student had already graduated). We fit three different regressions, each with a slightly expanded definition of a stop-out event: 1-semester non-enrolled, 2-semesters continuously non-enrolled, and 3-semesters continuously non-enrolled. Using gradually expanded stop-out definitions allowed us to assess whether the factors most associated with stop-out risk differed significantly depending on the length of non-enrollment.

We found that the greatest drivers of attrition did not vary much depending on the length of stop-out treated as the outcome. Factors associated with greater likelihood of 1-semester stop-out were also associated with higher risk of 2- and 3-semester stop-out. Our most surprising result instead concerned developmental education. Much evidence suggests that students who test into lower levels of developmental coursework are less likely to finish a credential. But we found that the lower the students tested into developmental coursework, the more they were retained and the less likely they were to stop out. This is perhaps an important lesson about what outcomes matter most: graduation and transfer. Retention only matters insofar as it helps people complete degrees or move on to new institutions for more opportunity. Our results paradoxically suggest that some factors that may boost retention actually harm the likelihood that students will ultimately graduate or transfer.